I'm here to talk about tolerance and I'm
here to talk about the implications of
the difference between domesticated
animals and the wild human interactions
with animals as wild things as opposed
to things that depend on our affection
to feed them protect them raise them in
this world twice to different people on
the Internet I've spoken to were rat
enthusiasts people who keep rats as pets
people who develop the same type of
emotional attachments to individual rats
that are more commonly developed between
people and dogs or cats or bunnies in
Western culture now all of those things
really are are about equally absurd
there's an argument that rats are a
little bit more absurd in some ways
because you know humans and dogs could
do certain types of labor together that
kind of thing and you can find some
justification dogs are a little bit
closer to horses in terms of the type of
of exploitation involved here in Canada
before Europeans arrived dogs really
worth of work animals for example for
the Cree they would pull sleds
you know the main mode of transport was
not using horses it was using dogs and
this has never been true for rats and
rats are feared as a source of disease
and we do have an instinctual reaction
to rats for that reason of fear or
apprehension the people overcome it
people become close to rats to different
people I spoke to on the Internet
we're really these rat enthusiasts these
rat fanciers in both cases they asked me
you know and I understand that we're
gonna judge me based on my answer and
it's all right you know where I stood on
rats and if I discovered how wonderful
rats were and how they can be loving
companions and friends and and so on and
in both cases there's significant amount
of time was more than a year between
talking these two people I said well you
know I used to humanitarian work in Laos
and so these
Asia and I knew other people in similar
situations and the real problem we face
the real problem we were struggling with
out there was of trying to store rice
without having rats devour it as you
know these are third world conditions
and you know I preferred nonviolent
methods the most important one was
actually designing the stilts you would
have the the little Hut where they kept
the rice would be elevated on stilts and
there were ingenious ways to kind of
create obstacles on these stilts take a
metal cone and have some some nails
sticking out if it's somewhat artistic
approach to making this stilts really
difficult for the rats to climb up said
but yeah but out there let me tell you
um I know you think about rats as pets
but I think about rats on the one hand
as animals that live in the wild and the
other hand as you know a real threat to
human life on the edge of the jungle or
in the middle of the jungle and it's
something we struggle with and of course
one of the reasons why even people who
are not vegan try to be nonviolent in
getting rid of rats is that there's
almost no point in killing them they're
so numerous unless you live on a small
island where the rat party you're never
gonna win by two rats so you want to
design buildings in a way that just
prevents rats from coming inside
prevents rats from eating the food
you've stored but still you know my view
was fundamentally one of human hostility
to rats and rats do carry disease you
know often the fleas living on rats and
so on and rats will bite you in your
sleep and come into your bed and no
human relationship with rats in anything
remotely resembling the wild is pretty
nasty and now both of these people as
say more than a year apart between when
I spoke to the internet they reacted
this with complete hostility complete
contempt and derision and real
incomprehension
because their worldview their
understanding of veganism was completely
based on the pet keeping paradigm
of keeping dogs as pets cats as pets of
having love for animals in this sense of
petting them and cuddling them and
feeding them keeping them as a house pet
and their whole point their whole
methodology was to extend this paradigm
to include rats in any kind of
contrasting view of what it's like
living with rats in third-world country
and the real practical problems you get
into and yeah sometimes it involves
violence against rats they didn't want
to hear it they wanted to live in a
fantasy land where they were morally
right and I was morally wrong and hey I
can sympathize is really easy for me to
imagine the world from their perspective
in which basically they're good and I'm
evil
now um a lot of people love dogs
it's a much more common people to love
dogs and they love rats I've been
attacked by packs of feral dogs packs of
dogs have attacked me not at a human
command you know dogs that were roaming
around I could tell some pretty funny
stories about having to defend myself
against dogs attacking me I've never had
to hurt or kill a dog I've never had to
butt in those experiences get in third
world countries in Southeast Asia it's
easy to imagine that it could have come
to that because it really was
self-defense with a marauding pack of
dogs attacking me and I'm not mad at
those dogs those dogs were living in
what's much closer to a natural
situation for them they weren't my pets
they weren't my friends and I love them
they don't love me and those dogs you
know I mean again that's another reason
to respect animals and not to kill them
and not to exploit them for food and not
to torture them in laboratories you know
you could see the main reason the dogs
were attacking me was to prove to one
another their social status you know as
pack animals the biggest dog wants to
show that he's stronger than the next
dog oh here's here comes this human that
I don't think they really expect to be
able to eat me but they think this is my
chance to improve my status and social
group of dogs and you know if you're
watching them you can see that they all
look at each other
the
roll judging each other's reactions in
one pack this was on the grounds of a
Buddhist monastery in a small town with
no electricity and dirt roads in the
north of Laos this was closer to the
border between Laos and China than Laos
and Myanmar
but up in that area a pack of dogs
attacked me and there were actually two
Buddhist monks sort of sitting on the
wall on the edge of the monastery
property that's very common and tera
vaada doesn't have a decorative wall
around the edge of the monastery it's
all I stay decorative the wall is also
believed to have supernatural properties
we're not gonna do that here um and this
big pack of dogs attacked and the
largest dog he was trying to show how
strong and dominant he was and he
actually left for my throat so you know
I'm tall I'm 6 foot 3 about about 190
centimeters so this dog made a big jump
to try to come in my throat which again
is a natural instinct if it were
attacking a deer or something that's
what their mouth is designed for us to
close on your throat and keep it pinned
shut now again I think this this dog the
big dog was just trying to show off in
front of the other dogs it's boldness
and now I didn't make any contact with
the dog actually but I did have to stand
up and I actually raised my foot
I didn't even kick the dog but I raised
my foot so that the dog would have
collided with my foot if it kept going
in midair and now unlike a video game in
real life when you take a jump you can't
really change direction much once your
feet have left the ground
so in this split-second this dog curled
up and curled backwards to avoid
slamming into my foot and say it had
been trying to lunge for my throat and I
I react in this defensive way and the
dog ended up inverting and landing on
its own head without coming in to cut
yeah and the two Buddhist monks sitting
on the wall laughed and laughed it was
so absurd it was so Charlie Chaplin
asked I don't know if you could train a
dog to this intention it was so
ridiculous but then the other thing was
all the other dogs in this pack
they also reacted you know like dogs
can't laugh but wow you could see this
whole range of reactions in the dogs and
look man out there as I said you know
you get to see turkeys and chickens with
more of their natural pack mentality and
competing with each other and fighting
with each other and all those things
going on and we're not even going to
talk about wild animals here we talk
about feral animals seven animals they
have a little bit of independence from
human beings but look when I was talking
about this stuff with these guys who who
were rat enthusiasts all this was
unthinkable to them I've had a couple of
videos recently they have not been as
popular as as my other videos talking
about this issue of domesticated animals
versus the wild and what the
implications are for our moral baseline
for how we conceptualize activism how we
think about veganism how we're engaged
the problems before us and you know
these people fundamentally had no
tolerance for someone coming from a
radically different background and it
really is tolerance we're talking about
here maybe I'm wrong maybe it's morally
wrong for me to do volunteer
humanitarian work that involves feeding
starving people in small villages in
Laos maybe maybe that is morally wrong
because the lives of rats are more
important than the lives of human beings
and my need to keep the rats out of the
grain storage the rice rice storage is
impossible to morally just like maybe
but you know what if I'm wrong I don't
need you to agree with me I need you to
tolerate it I need you to tolerate that
difference and if you can
then you can learn something from my
experience you can learn something from
my perspective but step 1 or step 0 is
to be tolerant say hey this guy is also
vegan but he really comes from a
different perspective than I do you know
the first argue let's say they were
living in California and they only think
of a rat as a host pet like a rabbit or
something well then do you experience
the rabbits in the wild either wild
rabbits wild hares hair and a rabbit are
two different species but in English we
confuse these terms a wild hare they're
terrified of human beings sorry I could
tell stories about that too but
encountering huge wild hare out on the
plains of Saskatchewan they're enormous
creatures and I don't want to be your
pet they don't wanna be your friend
they're defiant and proud and haughty
and scared from their perspective you
are a predator any contact you have with
a lot wild hare Orwell rabbit they
perceive you as trying to kill them and
you know they act accordingly I'm one of
the realest conversations I've ever had
with another vegan he's this guy was
vegan with more than a decade of
experience as an activist and organizer
not gonna say too much about his
background but I remember we were
talking about vivisection and I said we
were keeping it a hundred percent real I
said look you know like because
abolitionism is the current fashion and
veganism I pretend that I'm against
absolutely all vivisection underwear
also everything so that's what that's
what the political movement demands for
me you know but the reality is I can
think of very rare circumstances in
which one or two vivisections would be
necessary or would have to be approved
like I see vivisection as being like war
I don't think we should start a war
without having not just a vote in
parliament let's have a referendum you
know the Soviet Union sent a dog into
space dog called Lika was the first
mammal to go into outer space go into
orbit around the Earth and Lika died
that dog was killed for the progress of
science
now if only one dog were killed by the
progress of science every ten years
under extraordinary circumstances like
that it's like well we're gonna send an
animal into space and we don't actually
understand the physics of the Kuiper
belt and of radiation in orbit and you
know we need to test a bunch of things
um even though I'm a vegan and I would
describe myself as net wishes vegan yes
I can imagine a house of parliament
having a vote and say okay you know what
this one dog and this one spaceflight
okay you know this one dog is gonna die
and maybe I'm wrong maybe I'm morally
evil maybe human exploration of space
does not justify the death of even one
dog and maybe saving the lives of people
who are starving to death doesn't
justify the death of one rat maybe
that's your immoral perspective but even
if I'm wrong I'm asking you to tolerate
me
okay as one vegan to another just as one
human being to another I want you to
recognize that I have good intentions
even if I come to this with a somewhat
different perspective from what you do
the reason I told this trans way is that
this guy I think he'd probably never
said it out loud before but this guy who
was an experienced vegan activist years
and years of experience doing it
full-time - he he like it was like he
came out of the closet he admitted that
actually that was what he believed also
he said yeah actually for years he'd
been saying absolutely no vivisection is
acceptable but he said actually really
he believed that an incredibly small
amount of vivisection only four
incredibly good reasons would be
acceptable now the reality is when you
look up the statistics governments
around the world pass resolutions and
say they're only going to do vivisection
when it's medically necessary and it
doesn't work and it's a failure of
democracy it's a failure of the
parliamentary system and some countries
are better than others New Zealand right
now has better laws than Europe Europe
has better laws than America America has
better laws than Canada and what
we can all torture Apes to death with
impunity or in candidates ridiculous but
hey and hate Canada probably has better
laws than China I've never looked at
legislation about vivisection in China
it's true the failure of the legal
system in this regard is so terrible it
has been so terrible for decades that
yes the abolitionist answer is the
simple thing to do and we haven't really
gotten to the point where these debates
have happened but they're gonna happen
and before we ever get to that stage and
activism so they've said again and again
here if you really want to get organized
on to the session you need to build
common ground with the scientists who
are not vegan who are not a hundred
percent abolitionist but scientists who
really understand how the institutions
work where the money comes from how the
protocol gets set up how the ethics
committee works how government oversight
relates to the university or the lab and
people who those I anticipate a percent
they probably see tremendous waste and
suffering for happening for no good
reason
you know torturing rabbits to death so
you can have a slightly redder shade of
lipstick torturing animals to death for
the you know we at we had animals being
tortured death for dentistry at my
University in Toronto
it wasn't even to me totally
unforgivable unconscionable immoral etc
okay but the point is that scientist who
only wants to see an 80% reduction not a
100 percent reduction or me I want to
see a 99.99% reduction but I can think
of just like you know the desert island
thing with you what if you were on a
desert island okay I can think of the
equivalent to what if you want a desert
island fur for vivisection even if that
guy is wrong that scientist is wrong
there was a really good reason why I'm
asking you not to agree with them but to
have tolerance